#separator:tab
#html:false
#tags column:3
Distinguish between forwards, futures and options.	Forwards: OTC bilateral contracts to buy/sell an asset at a future date at a price agreed today; negotiable/flexible terms, not liquid, high credit risk. Futures: exchange-traded standardised contracts (fixed delivery dates, sizes); liquid, low credit risk due to clearing house, margin required. Options: give the holder the RIGHT (not obligation) to buy (call) or sell (put) at a fixed price; the most the buyer can lose is the premium paid. Forwards and futures are obligations; options are not.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.1
What is a swap (contract for difference) and how does it relate to forwards?	A swap is essentially a series of forward contracts — an agreement between two parties to exchange a series of cash flows in the future. Swaps are traded OTC. There are four main kinds: interest rate, equity, currency and inflation swaps.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.1
Explain the nature, trading and settlement of exchange-traded derivatives and the role of the clearing house.	Exchange-traded derivatives (e.g. on ICE Futures Europe) are standardised contracts. The clearing house becomes the formal counterparty to both buyer and seller, guaranteeing fulfilment and eliminating counterparty credit risk between traders. Traders must deposit initial margin to cover potential daily losses. Variation margin is the daily mark-to-market payment from losers to winners; in the event of non-payment the clearing house uses initial margin as collateral.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.2
Explain bilateral margin requirements for OTC (uncleared) derivatives.	Following the 2008 crisis, G20/BIS/IOSCO introduced bilateral margin requirements for uncleared OTC derivatives to reduce systemic risk. Initial margin (collateral) is exchanged on a gross basis by both parties and must be immediately available in default and protected from the collecting party's bankruptcy. Variation margin must fully collateralise mark-to-market exposure, calculated and exchanged daily under a single netting agreement. The ISDA SIMM® provides a standard methodology for calculating regulatory initial margin.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.2
What is the nature and role of a central counterparty (CCP) and its 'waterfall' structure?	A CCP interposes itself between counterparties, becoming buyer to every seller and vice versa, ensuring future performance of open contracts. If a member defaults and its posted collateral is insufficient, the CCP draws on: (1) a default fund from its own resources; (2) a general default fund from all members; (3) incremental assessments on members; (4) a guarantee from the parent company; (5) capital of the CCP. This sequence is the 'waterfall'.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.2
Why might an investor use a futures contract rather than trade the underlying asset?	(1) Lower transaction costs; (2) greater liquidity than the underlying; (3) faster execution; (4) ability to take a short position not easily achievable in the cash market; (5) leverage — margin system means exposure without full cash outlay.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.3
Define the 'basis' of a futures contract and distinguish contango from backwardation.	Basis = spot price − futures price. Contango: futures price > spot price (basis is negative); the normal state when cost of carry (storage, financing) exceeds any convenience yield. Backwardation: spot price > futures price (basis is positive); occurs when the convenience yield of holding the physical asset exceeds the cost of carry, e.g. when physical supply is tight.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.4_13.1.5
Describe the main features of the short-term sterling (short sterling) interest rate futures contract on ICE Futures Europe.	Based on a £500,000 notional 3-month deposit. Priced as 100 minus the implied annualised interest rate (e.g. 90.11 implies 9.89%). Cash-settled. Tick size = 0.005% (half a basis point). Value of one basis point = 0.01% × £500,000 = £50 per annum, or £12.50 for a 3-month contract. Delivery months: March, June, September, December.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.6
Describe the main features of long gilt futures and FTSE 100 futures on ICE Futures Europe.	Long gilt futures: written on government bonds, contract value £100,000 nominal, NOT cash-settled (physical delivery of a range of eligible gilts), tick value = £10 (0.01 of £100,000 × 0.01 × 0.01). Seller delivers the cheapest-to-deliver (CTD) bond. FTSE 100 futures: cash-settled, priced at £10 per index point, tick = 0.5 point (value £5), initial margin c. £2,000.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.6
How can short-term interest rate futures be used to hedge interest rate risk? Give an example.	A company expecting to place money on deposit fears rates will fall → buys (goes long) short sterling futures to lock in a rate. If rates fall, the futures price rises and the gain offsets the lower deposit rate. Conversely, a borrower fearing rate rises → sells (goes short) futures. Example: buy 3 contracts at 87.5 (implying 12.5%); rates fall 2%, futures rise to 89.5; gain = 3 × 200 basis points × £12.50 = £7,500, exactly offsetting the deposit income shortfall.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.7
How can long gilt futures be used to hedge a bond portfolio?	A portfolio manager holding long-term gilts who fears rising long-term rates (falling gilt prices) sells long gilt futures. If rates rise and gilt prices fall, the loss on the portfolio is offset by a gain on the short futures position. Gain = (price sold − price bought) × 100 × number of contracts × tick value.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.7
How can FTSE 100 futures be used to hedge an equity portfolio?	An equity fund manager hedges by selling FTSE 100 futures. If the market falls, the gain on the short futures position offsets the portfolio loss. The number of contracts: N = (portfolio value ÷ (index level × £10)) × β.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.7
Define index arbitrage.	Index arbitrage exploits pricing anomalies between the cash index and the futures price. In theory, the futures price differs from the spot by the cost of carry. If the actual futures price deviates sufficiently from its theoretical value, an arbitrageur sells the expensive instrument and buys the cheap one (e.g. sell expensive futures, buy underlying stocks), earning a risk-free profit. Program trading executes these simultaneously. Such opportunities are limited by technology and transaction costs.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.8
Distinguish between American-style and European-style options.	European-style options can only be exercised on the expiry date. American-style options can be exercised at any time up to and including the expiry date, making them at least as valuable as equivalent European options. Most exchange-traded options (e.g. on ICE Futures Europe) are American-style.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.9
Define intrinsic value and time value of an option premium.	Option premium = intrinsic value + time value. Intrinsic value: the profit if exercised immediately — for a call, max(S − X, 0); for a put, max(X − S, 0). Time value: the remainder of the premium above intrinsic value, reflecting the probability that the option will gain intrinsic value before expiry. Time value decays to zero at expiry.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.10
Determine when an option is in-the-money, out-of-the-money or at-the-money.	Call option: ITM when S > X; ATM when S = X; OTM when S < X. Put option: ITM when S < X; ATM when S = X; OTM when S > X. (S = underlying asset price, X = exercise/strike price.) An OTM option has zero intrinsic value but may still have time value.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.11
Calculate the time value of an option given premium, strike price and current market price.	Time value = premium − intrinsic value. Example: Call with strike 460p, share price 468.9p, premium 9.75p. Intrinsic value = 468.9 − 460 = 8.9p. Time value = 9.75 − 8.9 = 0.85p.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.12
What are the five inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model?	(1) Strike/exercise price; (2) current stock price; (3) time to expiration; (4) risk-free interest rate; (5) volatility of the underlying asset (measured by annualised standard deviation of returns). The model outputs the theoretical option premium. An alternative approach is the Binomial model, which converges on Black-Scholes.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.12
Identify and explain the factors that determine the premium of an option.	(1) Cash price relative to exercise price (intrinsic value); (2) time to expiry (longer = higher premium, more time for favourable moves); (3) volatility of the underlying (higher volatility = higher premium for both calls and puts); (4) interest rates (rising rates increase call premiums and decrease put premiums, because the cost of buying the stock rises making calls more attractive and shorting shares more attractive than buying puts); (5) dividends (not a Black-Scholes input but affect the underlying price).	IMC::Topic13::13.1.13
What are the option Greeks: delta, theta, vega and rho?	Delta: sensitivity of option price to a change in the underlying price (e.g. share up 10p, call up 3p → delta = 0.3). Theta: sensitivity to the passage of time (time decay). Vega: sensitivity to a change in volatility of the underlying. Rho: sensitivity to a change in interest rates. These are critical for pricing and portfolio management.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.13
Summarise the max profit, max loss, breakeven and motivation for a long call, short call, long put and short put.	Long call: max profit unlimited, max loss = premium, breakeven = strike + premium, motivation = bullish. Short call: max profit = premium, max loss unlimited, breakeven = strike + premium, motivation = bearish/neutral. Long put: max profit = strike − premium (if share goes to zero), max loss = premium, breakeven = strike − premium, motivation = bearish. Short put: max profit = premium, max loss = strike − premium, breakeven = strike − premium, motivation = bullish/neutral.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.14
Describe a long straddle: construction, max profit/loss, breakeven and motivation.	Buy a call AND a put on the same asset with the same strike price and expiry. Max profit: unlimited. Max loss: total premiums paid (call + put). Breakeven: strike ± combined premiums. Motivation: volatile markets — the investor expects a large move but is unsure of direction. A short straddle is the mirror image (sell both), profiting from stable/static markets.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.14
Describe a long strangle: construction, max profit/loss, breakeven and motivation.	Buy a put and a call on the same asset with the same expiry but DIFFERENT strike prices (put strike below call strike). Max profit: unlimited. Max loss: combined premiums. Breakeven: call strike + combined premiums, or put strike − combined premiums. Motivation: volatile markets (even more so than a straddle), but cheaper because both options are typically OTM. A short strangle is the opposite.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.14
Describe a covered call strategy: construction, effect and motivation.	Hold the underlying asset AND sell (write) a call option on it. The premium income provides a cushion against a modest fall in the asset price but caps the upside gain. Max gain = (strike − current price) + premium. Motivation: mildly bullish/neutral — the investor does not expect the share to rise much above the strike.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.14
Describe a protective put strategy: construction, effect and motivation.	Hold the underlying asset AND buy a put option. This provides downside protection (can sell at the strike price) while retaining unlimited upside minus the cost of the put. Max loss = (current price − strike) + premium. Breakeven: the price must rise enough to cover the put premium. Motivation: bullish but wanting insurance against downside.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.14
How are FTSE 100 stock index options structured and how is the gain/loss calculated?	Traded on ICE Futures Europe, cash-settled, each index point = £10. Premium is quoted in index points. Call gain P = £10 × (index value − strike − premium). Put gain P = £10 × (strike − index value − premium). Used to hedge equity portfolios: buying puts protects against falls while allowing participation in rises (unlike futures hedging which locks in a value).	IMC::Topic13::13.1.15
Explain how futures can be used to hedge an equity portfolio and give the formula for the number of contracts.	Sell FTSE 100 index futures. N = (face value of cash exposure ÷ face value of futures contract) × β. Face value of futures contract = index level × £10. This locks the portfolio into a terminal value: TV₁ = MV₀ × [1 + ((Pᶠ − Pˢ)/Pˢ) × β], where Pᶠ and Pˢ are futures and spot index levels at inception. Hedge efficiency = |futures gain/loss| ÷ |cash market gain/loss| × 100%. Works well if portfolio is well diversified and beta is stable.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.16
How is the number of put options calculated to hedge an equity portfolio?	N = (face value of cash exposure ÷ face value of index option) × β. Face value of index option = strike × £10. The advantage over futures is the portfolio is protected from falls (can exercise puts) but retains upside minus the cost of the puts.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.16
What is a credit default swap (CDS) and how does it work?	A bilateral OTC contract providing insurance against a bond default. The protection buyer pays a periodic premium (spread, in basis points over the risk-free rate) to the protection seller. If a credit event occurs (bankruptcy, default, failure to pay, or restructuring), the seller pays the buyer face value of the bond in return for the bond (physical settlement) or pays the difference between face value and market value (cash settlement, determined by auction). The buyer need not own the underlying bond.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
How are CDS quoted in the market?	Post-GFC, CDS have standardised maturities (quarterly dates, four times a year) and standard premiums (100 or 500 bps). Quoted as either: (1) 'Points upfront' — the upfront fee as a percentage of notional (e.g. 3 points upfront = 3%); or (2) Price = 100 − points. A CDS quoted at 3 points upfront has a price of 97.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
What are the key CDS pricing determinants?	(1) The default probability of the reference entity; (2) the expected recovery amount if default occurs. The market uses the CDS spread to imply a default probability for each period, allowing computation of expected losses and volatility.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
Name the main types of credit derivatives (funded and unfunded).	Unfunded: CDSs (single entity, basket, credit default index swaps such as CDX and iTraxx), total return swaps, constant maturity CDSs, first-loss and tranche-loss CDSs. Funded: credit-linked notes (CLNs) and synthetic CDOs. A CDO made up of credit derivatives is called a synthetic CDO.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
What is a total return swap?	A way of transferring total economic exposure (credit and market risk) of an underlying asset. The payer transfers all economic exposure without selling the asset; the receiver gains exposure without buying it. Common underlying assets: corporate bonds, loans, equities. Used for confidential de-risking.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
What is a credit-linked note (CLN)?	A floating or fixed rate note where principal and/or coupon payments are referenced to a credit or basket of credits. If no credit event occurs, payments proceed normally. If a credit event occurs, the payment of principal and possibly coupons is reduced.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
What is a collateralised debt obligation (CDO)?	A CDO involves packaging revenue-generating assets (e.g. bank loans) and issuing a bond backed by them, sliced into tranches of varying credit risk. If made up of credit derivatives rather than actual assets, it is called a synthetic CDO. Buyers/sellers include banks, insurance companies, hedge funds and pension funds.	IMC::Topic13::13.1.17
Explain the role of stock lending in the markets and the benefits to participants.	Securities lending: securities are temporarily transferred from a lender to a borrower, who provides collateral and returns them at an agreed term or on demand. Legal title transfers; the borrower 'manufactures' equivalent income (dividends/coupons) back to the lender. Lenders (pension funds, insurers, mutual funds) earn a fee on otherwise idle holdings (up to 200 bps for FTSE 100 equities, c. 40 bps for gilts). Borrowers use securities to cover short positions, settle trades or for short selling.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.1
Explain the mechanics and uses of short selling and describe a short squeeze.	Short selling: borrow a security via stock lending, sell it at the current price, buy it back later at a (hoped-for) lower price, return it to the lender and profit from the difference. Used by hedge funds and other alternative managers. A short squeeze occurs when a heavily shorted security's price rises sharply, forcing short sellers to buy back at higher prices to cover, further driving the price up (e.g. GameStop in January 2021).	IMC::Topic13::13.2.2
Explain the nature of contracts for difference (CFDs).	A CFD is an agreement between two parties to exchange the difference between the opening and closing price of a contract, multiplied by a specified contract size. CFDs replicate the economic performance of owning the underlying (e.g. equity) without owning it, allowing easy long or short positions. Equity index futures are a type of CFD. Swaps are OTC CFDs.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.3
Explain equity swaps with an example.	An equity swap is a CFD where one party pays the return on an equity/index to the other in exchange for a fixed return, on a notional amount. Example: manager pays the FTSE 100 return and receives 5% fixed on £10m notional. If FTSE returns 7%, the manager pays net (7% − 5%) × £10m = £200,000. This removes equity market exposure while retaining the underlying holdings.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.4
Explain interest rate swaps with an example.	A periodic net settlement between two parties of a fixed rate vs a variable rate (e.g. SONIA) on a notional principal. The fixed-rate payer is the 'buyer'. Example: pay 5% fixed, receive SONIA on £10m notional, quarterly settlement. If 3-month SONIA = 5.5%, net settlement = 0.5% × £10m × 0.25 = £12,500 received. No initial outlay; it is a 'fair swap' — the fixed rate equals the average of expected future floating rates.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.4
Explain currency swaps and their motivation.	A currency swap involves exchanging cash flows in different currencies. Parties may exchange principals at initiation, swap periodic interest payments (fixed or floating in each currency), and re-exchange principals at termination. Motivation: to exploit comparative advantage — each party borrows in the currency where it has a better rate, then swaps into its desired currency, achieving a lower overall cost than direct foreign borrowing.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.4
Explain inflation swaps.	Inflation swaps transfer inflation risk between counterparties. They include real rate swaps, swaps of inflation-protected securities (e.g. TIPS, ILGs). Similar to fixed vs floating interest rate swaps but use a real rate coupon vs floating inflation. Typically priced on a zero-coupon basis (payment exchanged at end of term: one party pays compounded fixed, the other pays actual inflation). Real rate swap = nominal interest rate swap − corresponding inflation swap.	IMC::Topic13::13.2.4
Explain the nature of convertible bonds and convertible preference shares.	A convertible bond allows the holder to convert their debt holding into a pre-specified number of the firm's ordinary shares on or before a set expiry date. This allows the issuer to issue debt at a lower coupon than an equivalent non-convertible. Convertible preference shares work similarly. The conversion option is valued like an American call option on the firm's shares.	IMC::Topic13::13.3.1
Calculate conversion price, conversion value and conversion premium for a convertible bond.	Conversion price = par value of convertible ÷ conversion ratio (CR). Conversion value = current share price × CR. Conversion premium = the amount by which the convertible's market price exceeds its conversion value, reflecting the option value. Example: par £100, CR = 25 → conversion price = £4. If share price = £2, conversion value = £2 × 25 = £50.	IMC::Topic13::13.3.2
Explain the component parts of a convertible bond's valuation: straight bond value, call option value, dilution effect and conversion ratio.	C = Pᵦ + (Aᶜ/(1+q)) × CR, where Pᵦ = price of equivalent non-convertible bond; Aᶜ = value of an American call option on the firm's shares (same expiry and exercise price); q = percentage increase in outstanding shares if all bonds convert; CR = conversion ratio. The convertible's price will always be at least as great as an equivalent non-convertible bond.	IMC::Topic13::13.3.3
Distinguish between a warrant and a call option.	A warrant is a call option issued by a corporation on its own stock. Like options, warrants have intrinsic value (formula value) and time value (premium). Key differences: (1) warrants generally have longer lives (typically 5+ years vs months for traded options); (2) exercising a warrant creates NEW shares, diluting existing shareholders; (3) warrant holders have no voting rights or dividend entitlements.	IMC::Topic13::13.3.4
How is a warrant valued, and what is the formula value and percentage premium?	Formula value (intrinsic value) FV = (S − X) × N, where S = share price, X = exercise price, N = number of new shares per warrant. Warrant value W = (Aᶜ/(1 + PC)) × N, where Aᶜ = equivalent American call option value and PC = percentage increase in shares if all warrants are exercised. Percentage premium PP = (warrant price − formula value) ÷ (N × stock price).	IMC::Topic13::13.3.4
Explain the key features of covered warrants.	Covered warrants give the right to buy (call) or sell (put) an asset at a specific price within a specified period. They differ from ordinary warrants: (1) issued by investment banks, not the company; (2) listed on the London Stock Exchange; (3) settled through CREST; (4) exercising does not create new shares (the issuer buys/sells in the open market to cover); (5) mostly cash-settled, so no stamp duty; (6) can be American or European style; (7) available on UK and international stocks/indices; (8) limited life (6–12 months, some up to 6 years); (9) offer leverage (gearing) for speculation or defence.	IMC::Topic13::13.3.5
