#separator:tab
#html:false
#tags column:3
What is a Treasury Bill (T-Bill) and what are its key characteristics?	A short-term (less than one year) government security issued at a discount to par value. T-Bills pay no coupon; the return comes from the difference between purchase price and par value at maturity. They are issued to manage cash in the banking system and are considered default-risk free. UK T-Bills use a 365-day year convention.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
How do you calculate the annualised (simple) yield on a UK T-Bill?	T-Bill yield = [(par value − purchase price) / purchase price] × (365 / D) × 100%, where D is days remaining to redemption. This is a simple (non-compounded) quoted yield. The true compound annual return is: [1 + (par − price)/price]^(365/D) − 1.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.2
What is the interbank market and what key reference rates are used?	A wholesale market where banks lend to each other, typically unsecured, for periods from overnight to one year. LIBOR (now ceased) was the key rate; it has been replaced by risk-free reference rates: SONIA (Sterling Overnight Index Average) for GBP and SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) for USD. SONIA is based on actual overnight unsecured sterling transactions and is published by the Bank of England. SOFR is based on overnight borrowing secured by US Treasury securities.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
Why was LIBOR replaced and what was wrong with it?	LIBOR was based on subjective estimates by banks of their borrowing costs, not actual transactions. Following the 2008 GFC, the interbank market became less liquid, making these estimates less accurate. LIBOR was also found to have been manipulated by market participants. All 35 LIBOR settings permanently ceased by end of September 2024. SONIA (for GBP) and SOFR (for USD) are the replacements.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
What is a certificate of deposit (CD)?	A tradeable (negotiable) time deposit issued by banks, typically with maturity of one month to one year in the UK. Issued in denominations of £10,000+, minimum value £100,000. CDs pay a fixed interest rate and are priced similarly to zero-coupon bonds. Their negotiability means slightly lower rates than equivalent non-tradeable fixed-term deposits. In the UK, CDs carry no deposit insurance protection (unlike in the USA where FDIC covers up to $250,000).	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
What is commercial paper (CP)?	A short-term (7 days to 1 year) unsecured promissory note issued at a discount by creditworthy corporations. Generally negotiable but usually held to maturity. Credit risk is crucial since it is unsecured — credit rating agencies rate CP issuers. Defaults are rare.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
What is a floating rate note (FRN) and how does it differ from a fixed-coupon bond?	An FRN is issued at par with a coupon linked to a reference rate (e.g. six-month SONIA) plus a fixed margin. The coupon resets at regular intervals (every three or six months). Because the coupon resets to reflect current market rates, FRNs trade very close to par on reset dates and have duration close to zero. However, if the issuer's creditworthiness changes or the required spread changes, the FRN can trade above or below par between resets.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
What special features can FRNs have regarding coupon rates?	A floor sets a minimum coupon rate. A cap sets a maximum coupon rate. A drop-lock converts the FRN into a fixed-rate bond if the coupon falls below a specified minimum for the remainder of its life.	IMC::Topic12::12.1.1
What is a conventional gilt and how is it structured?	A UK Government bond (gilt-edged security) that pays a fixed semi-annual coupon and returns the principal (par value) at a specified maturity date. Gilts are considered virtually default-risk free. Prices are quoted per £100 nominal. The coupon reflects the market interest rate at the time of first issue. Gilts are categorised by remaining maturity: ultra-short (<3 years), short (<7 years), medium (7–15 years), long (>15 years).	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
How are gilts issued?	Through an auction process run by the Debt Management Office (DMO). The DMO announces the bond details (coupon, maturity, amount). Gilt-edged Market Makers (GEMMs) submit bids. The DMO fills orders from the highest bid downward. GEMMs then sell to clients (pension funds, insurance companies, etc.) or hold the gilts themselves.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What is an index-linked gilt (ILG) and what protection does it offer?	A gilt whose coupon and principal are linked to the Retail Prices Index (RPI), providing inflation protection. Both coupon payments and the redemption value are adjusted upward with inflation. ILGs offer a known real rate of return. UK ILGs issued after September 2005 use a three-month indexation lag; older ones use an eight-month lag. ILGs form the largest part of the gilt market after conventional gilts.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
How is the coupon on a three-month lag ILG calculated?	ILG coupon = C × index ratio_M, where C is the semi-annual coupon and index ratio_M = reference RPI (with three-month lag for the coupon date) ÷ reference RPI (for the issue date). The reference RPI for the first day of any month is the RPI from three months earlier; for other days, linear interpolation is used.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What is the inflation breakeven point between conventional and index-linked gilts?	If a conventional gilt yields, say, 4% and an ILG of the same maturity yields 2%, the breakeven inflation rate is approximately 2% (4% − 2%). If actual inflation exceeds 2%, the ILG holder earns a higher return than the conventional gilt holder, since both coupon and principal are uplifted by more than the difference.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What is gilt stripping?	STRIPS = Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal Securities. It involves breaking a conventional gilt into its individual cash flows, each traded separately as zero-coupon securities. A three-year gilt produces seven strips: six semi-annual coupon strips and one principal strip. Strips of the same maturity from different gilts can be bundled into zero-coupon bonds. Gilts can also be reconstituted from their strips.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What is a gilt repo?	A repurchase agreement: one party sells a gilt for cash and agrees to buy it back at a later date at the original price plus interest (the repo rate). For the seller, it is a way to borrow cash using the gilt as collateral (low interest rate due to low-risk collateral). For the buyer, it is a form of secured lending. Repos are also used to borrow bonds (e.g. to cover short positions). Usual term is up to one year.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
Distinguish between clean and dirty prices of a bond.	The clean price excludes accrued interest — this is the quoted price in the market, making it easier to compare bonds. The dirty price = clean price + accrued interest — this is the actual price paid by the buyer. Accrued interest compensates the seller for the coupon earned but not yet received. For gilts, accrued interest = (semi-annual coupon) × (days since last coupon / days in coupon period). A gilt purchased seven or fewer days before a coupon is quoted "ex-dividend" (buyer does not receive the next coupon).	IMC::Topic12::12.2.3
How is the price of a fixed-income security calculated given its maturity, coupon and yield?	B₀ = C/(1+R)¹ + C/(1+R)² + ... + (C+P)/(1+R)ⁿ, where B₀ = bond price, C = coupon per period, P = par value, R = required yield per period, n = number of periods. Rules: coupon < yield → price < par (discount); coupon > yield → price > par (premium); coupon = yield → price = par.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.2
What is the gross redemption yield (GRY) and how is it calculated?	The GRY (also called yield to maturity, YTM) is the internal rate of return of the bond's cash flows — the single discount rate that equates the present value of all future coupons and principal to the current market price. For gilts (semi-annual coupons), the quoted GRY = semi-annual IRR × 2. It is found by trial and error or financial calculator.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.1
Under what two conditions is the GRY an accurate measure of actual return?	(1) The bond must be held to maturity (selling early exposes the investor to price risk at the date of sale). (2) All coupons received before maturity must be reinvested at the GRY itself (a flat yield curve assumption). A sloping yield curve means the actual reinvestment rate will differ — this is reinvestment risk.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.1
What is the flat (interest) yield and when is it useful?	Flat yield = annual coupon / clean bond price. It measures only the income return, ignoring capital gains or losses. Useful for investors who rely on income to cover ongoing expenses. If the bond is below par, the flat yield exceeds the coupon rate; if above par, it is below the coupon rate.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.1
What is the net redemption yield (NRY) and the grossed-up NRY?	The NRY is calculated the same way as the GRY but using the after-tax coupon (C_net) instead of the gross coupon. For most bonds, the capital gain at maturity is tax-free, so only the coupon is adjusted. The grossed-up NRY converts the NRY on a tax-advantaged bond (e.g. a zero-coupon bond where all return is capital gain) into an equivalent gross yield for comparison: grossed-up NRY = NRY / (1 − tax rate).	IMC::Topic12::12.4.1
What is the relationship between bond prices and yields, and why is it non-linear?	There is an inverse relationship: as yields rise, bond prices fall, and vice versa. The relationship is non-linear (convex) because the bond pricing formula uses compounding — the present value formula produces a curved (convex) line when plotted against yield, not a straight line.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.3
What two factors determine a bond's price sensitivity to interest rate changes?	(1) Term to maturity — longer-maturity bonds are more price-sensitive because their fixed coupons are locked in for longer, so market rate changes have a greater cumulative impact on present value. (2) Coupon size — lower-coupon (and zero-coupon) bonds are more price-sensitive because a larger proportion of their value comes from the distant principal repayment, which is more heavily discounted.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.5
What are the two components of interest rate risk?	(1) Price risk — as yields rise (fall), bond prices fall (rise). (2) Reinvestment risk — as yields rise (fall), the return from reinvesting coupons rises (falls). These two risks work in opposite directions with respect to yield changes.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.4
List the main risks faced by bond holders beyond interest rate risk.	Credit risk (issuer's creditworthiness deteriorates), default risk (issuer fails to pay), inflation risk (fixed coupons lose real value — ILGs hedge this), currency risk (foreign-currency bonds affected by exchange rate movements), and call risk (callable bonds redeemed early when rates fall, forcing reinvestment at lower rates).	IMC::Topic12::12.3.2
What is Macaulay duration and how is it calculated?	The weighted average time to receipt of a bond's cash flows, where the weights are the present values of each cash flow as a proportion of the bond's total price. D = Σ[(PV of cash flow at time t / B) × t]. For a zero-coupon bond, duration equals its maturity. For coupon-paying bonds, duration is always less than maturity. Duration increases with maturity and decreases with higher coupons.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.6
What is modified duration (MD) and how is it used to estimate price changes?	MD = Macaulay duration / (1 + R), where R is the yield per period. MD approximates the percentage change in a bond's price for a 1 percentage point (100bp) change in yield. Approximate price change = (−MD) × (change in yield in percentage points) × (bond price). Example: MD = 2.44, price = £951.97, yield rises 0.1% → price change ≈ −2.44 × 0.001 × £951.97 = −£2.32.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.7
What is convexity and why does duration produce an estimation error?	Duration assumes a linear relationship between price and yield, but the true relationship is convex (curved). The convex price-yield curve always lies above the straight-line duration estimate. Therefore, duration underestimates the new bond price whether yields rise or fall — the error grows larger for bigger yield changes and for longer-term, lower-coupon bonds.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.9
How does a bond portfolio manager use duration in practice?	If expecting rates to rise, the manager shortens duration (holds shorter-maturity, higher-coupon bonds) to reduce price sensitivity and defend against falling prices. If expecting rates to fall, the manager lengthens duration (holds longer-maturity, lower-coupon bonds) to maximise the price gain from the anticipated rate decline.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.8
What is credit risk and how do credit rating agencies assess it?	Credit risk is the risk that the bond issuer will fail to honour its obligation to pay coupons or principal. Agencies (Moody's, S&P, Fitch) assign ratings by analysing: financial statements (capital structure, leverage, asset protection), macro-economic forecasts, industry trends, regulatory developments, management quality, and bond covenants. They also examine key ratios: ability to meet payments (profit before interest and tax / interest payable), indebtedness (interest-bearing debt / equity), and profitability (operating income / sales).	IMC::Topic12::12.3.10
Describe the credit rating scales and the investment grade boundary.	Moody's: Aaa (highest) down to C (default). S&P/Fitch: AAA down to D. Investment grade = BBB−/Baa3 and above. Below investment grade (BB+/Ba1 and below) = "high yield", "junk", or "sub-investment grade". The yield spread over government bonds widens as ratings fall — e.g. AAA ≈ 0.35% spread vs BB ≈ 1.79% spread. Default rates rise sharply below investment grade (BBB ≈ 0.14% one-year default vs CCC/C ≈ 25.98%).	IMC::Topic12::12.3.12
What are the main criticisms of credit rating agencies?	(1) Pre-GFC, they gave high ratings to mortgage-backed bonds that subsequently defaulted; their methodologies for novel structured products proved faulty. (2) They were criticised for acting as consultants, advising on bond structures to achieve desired ratings (conflict of interest). (3) They can be slow to downgrade when a company's finances deteriorate (e.g. Enron), partly because published accounts used in analysis lag real-world changes. Since the GFC, regulators have pushed for greater transparency and encouraged new entrants.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.11
Explain debt seniority and the typical ranking of bond claims.	Seniority determines the order of repayment in default. Ranking (highest to lowest priority): (1) bank loans, (2) senior secured bonds (backed by specific collateral — fixed charge on specific assets, or floating charge on a class of assets), (3) senior unsecured bonds (debentures, backed only by issuer creditworthiness), (4) subordinated bonds. "Pari passu" means two securities rank equally. Lower seniority = higher credit risk = higher yield.	IMC::Topic12::12.3.13
What is a bond indenture and what protections does it contain?	The legal document accompanying a corporate bond issue specifying bondholders' rights and the issuer's obligations. It includes: sinking fund provisions (issuer must retire a portion of the issue each year, reducing credit risk), and protective covenants (restrictions on the issuer's actions, e.g. limits on dividend payments, additional debt, future debt ranking, and executive pay).	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What are callable and puttable bonds, and who benefits from each?	A callable bond gives the issuer the right to redeem early at pre-specified prices. The issuer benefits if rates fall (can refinance at lower cost); the investor faces call risk (early return of capital at a time of lower reinvestment rates). Callable bonds carry greater reinvestment risk, so investors receive a call premium above par as compensation. A puttable bond gives the investor the right to sell the bond back to the issuer at a pre-specified price. The investor benefits if rates rise (can reinvest at higher rates). Puttable bonds sell at a premium to straight bonds.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.4
What are the main types of corporate bond?	(1) Mortgage bonds — secured on real estate/property (fixed charge). (2) Debentures — secured by a floating charge on a class of company assets. (3) Unsecured loan stock — no collateral, backed only by general creditworthiness; ranks with other unsecured creditors. (4) Zero-coupon bonds — no coupon, issued at a deep discount, redeemed at par; no reinvestment risk but high price risk. (5) Eurobonds — denominated in a currency other than the home currency of the country/market of issue; issued by corporations, banks, governments, supranational bodies.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.1
What is a contingent convertible (CoCo) bond?	Debt that converts to equity (or suffers a principal write-down) if a pre-specified trigger event occurs, such as the issuing bank's capital ratio falling below a certain level. CoCos are used by banks as a crisis management tool to bolster capital. Triggers can be mechanical (book-value or market-value based) or discretionary (PONV — point of non-viability, based on regulator/supervisor judgment). Loss-absorption can occur via conversion to equity (at a pre-set or market-price conversion rate) or via principal write-down (full or partial). CoCos are subordinated to other debt and therefore yield more. Investors include private banks and institutional investors attracted by high yields.	IMC::Topic12::12.2.4
What is the yield curve and what does it represent?	The yield curve (or term structure of interest rates) plots the GRY of bonds with the same credit risk (typically government bonds) against their maturity. It is a snapshot at a point in time showing how yields vary with maturity. It serves as the benchmark for evaluating yields of other bonds of similar maturity.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.3
Name and explain the three main theories of the yield curve shape.	(1) Pure expectations theory — the long-term rate is a geometric average of the current short-term rate and expected future short-term rates. An upward-sloping curve implies the market expects short rates to rise; downward-sloping implies expected rate falls; flat implies no change expected. (2) Liquidity preference theory — investors prefer short-term (liquid) assets, so they demand a liquidity premium for holding longer-term debt. This biases the curve upward even if rates are not expected to rise. A downward-sloping curve requires expected rate falls large enough to offset the liquidity premium. (3) Market segmentation theory — the bond market is segmented by maturity; supply and demand within each segment independently determine that part of the curve. Different investor types (e.g. pension funds in long maturities) have strong maturity preferences.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.4
Define forward rates and spot rates, and state the formula linking them.	A spot rate is the yield on a zero-coupon investment from today to a specific future date. A forward rate is the implied future short-term interest rate between two future dates. Formula: (1 + r₂)² = (1 + r₁) × (1 + f₂), where r₁ and r₂ are spot rates for years 1 and 2, and f₂ is the one-year forward rate beginning in year 1. Rearranged: f₂ = (1 + r₂)² / (1 + r₁) − 1.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.5
What is the relationship between forward rates, spot rates and the GRY?	Forwards are implied future short-term rates. Spots are geometric averages of the current short rate and all forward rates up to that point. The GRY of a coupon bond is a complex weighted average of the spot rates, where weights reflect the cash flows. A zero-coupon bond's yield equals the spot rate for its maturity. For an upward-sloping yield curve with coupon-paying bonds: forwards > spot rates > GRY. The reverse ordering holds for a downward-sloping curve.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.6
How do you use pure expectations theory to calculate an implied forward rate? Give an example.	If the two-year spot rate is 9% and the one-year spot rate is 8%, then: (1.09)² = (1.08) × (1 + f₂), so f₂ = 1.1881 / 1.08 − 1 = 10.01%. This means the market implies that the one-year rate in year two will be approximately 10.01%. An upward-sloping spot curve implies forward rates that are higher than current spot rates.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.5
When should an investor use the flat yield vs GRY vs NRY?	Flat yield: when the investor cares only about income (e.g. to cover living expenses) and ignores capital gains/losses. GRY: the standard total-return measure assuming the bond is held to maturity and coupons are reinvested at the GRY. NRY: when the investor is a taxpayer and wants to compare after-tax returns; uses net (after-tax) coupons. Grossed-up NRY: to compare a tax-efficient bond (e.g. zero-coupon, where all return is capital gain) against a fully taxed coupon bond on a like-for-like pre-tax basis.	IMC::Topic12::12.4.2
