#separator:tab
#html:false
#tags column:3
What are the characteristics of ordinary shares?	Ordinary shares represent risk capital of the firm with limited liability; holders have part-ownership, participate in residual profits (after payment of coupons to bondholders and preference dividends), have no guaranteed return, and liability is limited to the value of their equity stake. They normally carry voting rights (corporate policy, mergers, board appointments, further capital raising).	IMC::Topic11::11.1.1
What is authorised share capital?	The maximum amount of share capital a company was authorised to issue. Since the Companies Act 2006 (effective 2009), this concept no longer applies — directors can now issue share capital without a ceiling set by authorised capital.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.1
Ordinary shares have no redemption date. How is their value determined?	By supply and demand in the secondary market. Share prices are quoted in the Financial Times grouped by sector (e.g. Oil & Gas, Telecommunications).	IMC::Topic11::11.1.1
How are dividends on ordinary shares typically paid in the UK?	Usually semi-annually from after-tax profits: an interim dividend followed by a final dividend. Dividends are not guaranteed and may vary or be omitted entirely. Ordinary shareholders rank behind preference shareholders for dividend payments.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.1
What are the key risks to an investor in ordinary shares?	(1) Returns are not guaranteed — dividends can be cut or omitted; (2) in liquidation, ordinary shareholders rank last (after all creditors and preference shareholders); (3) share price can fall; (4) the company may fail entirely, though liability is limited to the amount invested.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.1
What are preference shares and how do they differ from ordinary shares?	Preference shares pay a fixed dividend (as a percentage of nominal/face value) rather than a variable one. They usually carry no voting rights. Dividends on ordinary shares cannot be paid until all preference dividends are paid. In liquidation, preference stockholders are paid before ordinary shareholders. Their actual market value is set by secondary market demand.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.3
Why might a company issue preference shares rather than debt?	Preference shares are technically equity, not debt, so issuing them avoids increasing the company's gearing (debt-to-equity ratio) and the associated negative impact. They also offer greater flexibility — the company can defer the preference dividend without defaulting (unlike missing a bond coupon). They can also be used as incentives in transactions, offering the buyer security and a fiscal guarantee.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.3
Why might an investor buy preference shares?	Preference shares offer a more predictable, fixed income stream (like a bond) with less price volatility than ordinary shares, plus priority over ordinary shareholders on dividends and on liquidation of company assets.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.3
What is an American Depository Receipt (ADR)?	A certificate of beneficial ownership in a specified number of shares in a non-US company, traded on the NYSE or NASDAQ in the USA. A US bank buys non-US shares, bundles them, and sells ADR certificates. It was introduced to facilitate US trading of non-US equities.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.4
What are the benefits and limitations of ADRs?	Benefits for US investors: easier access to foreign equities, lower admin costs, avoidance of foreign transaction taxes. Benefits for non-US companies: access to US capital markets and US investor exposure. Limitations: ADRs do NOT eliminate currency risk or political/economic risk in the underlying country. Different levels of ADR exist reflecting different regulatory scrutiny.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.4
What is a Global Depository Receipt (GDR)?	Similar to an ADR but the bank certificates are issued in more than one country. Shares are held by a foreign branch of an international bank and trade on the International Order Book of the London Stock Exchange. Not all GDRs are ADRs (ADRs are US-traded only).	IMC::Topic11::11.1.4
Distinguish between primary and secondary share issuance.	Primary share issuance involves a company listing on the stock exchange for the first time (IPO). Secondary share issuance occurs when a firm that already has a listing seeks to raise additional capital (e.g. rights issue, seasoned equity offering).	IMC::Topic11::11.2.1
What role does an investment bank play in a share issuance?	It advises on timing, size and price; prepares documentation (prospectus); may underwrite the issue (guaranteeing to buy any unsold shares); and helps market the shares to investors.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.1
What is an IPO and why might a company engage in one?	An initial public offering — the first time a private company's stock is offered to the public. Reasons: to raise money for growth or acquisitions, to pay down debt, and to obtain a public listing. However, issuing new shares dilutes existing shareholders' ownership. IPO shares are often deliberately underpriced to attract investors.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.2
What are the two types of secondary offering and how do they differ in terms of dilution?	(1) A dilutive secondary offering: the company issues new shares, diluting EPS and existing share value. (2) A non-dilutive secondary offering: existing shareholders (e.g. insiders, founders) sell their own shares; no new shares are created and the company receives no cash, so no dilution occurs.	IMC::Topic11::11.1.2
List the main equity issuance methods.	(1) Placing — issuing house buys all shares and resells to institutional investors; used for smaller issues, less costly. (2) Accelerated book building — investment bank gauges investor interest over 1–2 days; may guarantee a minimum price. (3) Intermediaries' offer — multiple brokers place shares with their own clients. (4) Offer for sale — shares offered to the general public at a fixed price; prospectus advertised in national press. (5) Offer for sale by tender — public bids above a minimum price; a striking price is set. (6) Offer for sale by subscription — the firm (not issuing house) offers directly to public; only used by large firms. (7) Introduction — company joins the market without raising new capital; no underwriting needed. (8) Equity crowdfunding — public invests in an early-stage unlisted company for shares.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.2
What is a rights issue and why is it used?	The most popular way for an already-listed firm to issue new ordinary shares. Existing shareholders can subscribe for new shares in proportion to their current holding at a fixed price (usually below market price). It is a right, not an obligation; the rights themselves have value and can be sold.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.3
How do you calculate the theoretical ex-rights price (TERP)?	TERP = (Value of shares before the issue + Money raised from new shares) ÷ Total number of shares after the issue. Example: 400 shares at £1.20 + 100 new shares at £0.80 = £560 ÷ 500 = £1.12.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.4
How do you calculate the value of a nil-paid right?	Value of the right = TERP − subscription price. Example: £1.12 − £0.80 = £0.32 per right.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.4
What options does an investor have in response to a rights issue, and how does each affect their wealth?	(1) Take up the rights — buy new shares at the subscription price; total holding value is preserved. (2) Sell the rights — receive cash equal to rights × right value; holding falls to (old shares × TERP) but cash compensates. (3) Do nothing — the firm may sell the rights on the investor's behalf and distribute proceeds, or may keep the proceeds, causing the shareholder a loss. Note: "cum-rights" = share price before the issue; "ex-rights" = share price after.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.5
What is a scrip issue (bonus issue)?	A secondary share issue where new shares are issued free of charge to existing shareholders in proportion to their holdings. The total value of the company does not change — only the number of shares increases and the price per share falls proportionally.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.3
How do you calculate the ex-scrip price?	Ex-scrip price = (Ordinary shares held × original share price) ÷ Total number of new shares held. Example: 500 shares at £10.50 with a 1-for-20 scrip → 525 shares; ex-scrip = (500 × £10.50) / 525 = £10.00.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.6
What is a scrip dividend and what are its tax implications?	When a company pays a scrip issue instead of a cash dividend. Advantage for the investor: receiving new shares may be treated as a capital gain (potentially lower tax than income tax on dividends), provided the investor has not exceeded their CGT allowance.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.3
What is a stock split?	A company splits its existing shares into shares with a smaller par value, reducing the share price proportionally. No new capital is raised, market capitalisation remains the same, and no dilution occurs. Used when a firm feels its share price is too high but does not want to capitalise reserves (as a scrip issue does).	IMC::Topic11::11.2.3
What is a share repurchase (buyback) and what motivates it?	The company buys its own shares from existing shareholders in the open market or via a tender offer (usually at a premium to market price). Motivations: (1) return surplus cash to shareholders when no profitable investment opportunities exist; (2) bolster the share price; (3) improve financial ratios (lower equity → higher ROE, lower PE); (4) offset dilution from employee stock options; (5) possible tax advantage (capital gains vs dividends). Since 2003 UK companies can hold repurchased shares "in treasury" rather than cancelling them.	IMC::Topic11::11.2.7
How is the holding period return for an ordinary share calculated?	R = (P_t − P_{t−1} + D_t) / P_{t−1}, where P_t = price at end of period, P_{t−1} = price at start, D_t = dividend received. Example: buy at 100p, sell at 110p, no dividend → (110−100)/100 = 10%.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.1
What is the general present value formula for pricing an ordinary share?	P₀ = Σ [E(D_t) / (1+R)^t] for t = 1 to ∞, where E(D_t) is the expected dividend at time t and R is the required rate of return (discount rate). The share price should equal the present value of all expected future dividends.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.7
How is the dividend yield calculated and what are its limitations?	Dividend yield = D₀ / P₀ (gross of tax). Limitations: (1) it reflects only the income component — ignores capital gains; (2) the current dividend may not persist; (3) comparing yields across firms can be misleading due to different payout policies (a high yield may mean the firm is not reinvesting for growth).	IMC::Topic11::11.3.5
How is dividend cover calculated and what does it indicate?	Dividend cover = EPS / DPS. A cover of 3× means earnings are three times the dividend paid. The inverse (DPS/EPS) is the dividend payout ratio — the proportion of earnings paid as dividends. A cover of 1.0 means all earnings are distributed (risky if earnings fall).	IMC::Topic11::11.3.5
What factors influence a company's dividend policy?	(1) Signalling — reluctance to cut dividends as it signals trouble; (2) clientele effect — attracting investors who prefer a certain dividend policy; (3) tax — tax treatment of dividends vs capital gains; (4) stable earnings and easy capital market access favour higher payouts; (5) need to retain earnings for growth or to avoid dilutive share issues. Practical constraints: dividends must be legal (distributable reserves on balance sheet) and the firm must have the cash.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.2
State the Gordon Growth Model (dividend discount model) formula and define each term.	P₀ = D₁ / (R − g), where P₀ = current share price, D₁ = next period's expected dividend, R = required rate of return, g = constant growth rate of dividends. Re-arranged: R = D₁/P₀ + g, or equivalently R = [D₀(1+g)/P₀] + g.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.8
What are the key assumptions and limitations of the Gordon Growth Model?	Assumptions: dividends grow at a constant rate g indefinitely; R > g. Limitations: (1) constant growth is unrealistic — dividend policy may change with economic conditions; (2) for firms that don't pay dividends the model is inapplicable; (3) small changes in g or R produce large changes in P₀; (4) differences in estimated return between two firms may simply reflect different risk levels, not mispricing.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.7
What are the methods for estimating the dividend growth rate g?	(1) Average past dividend growth rate (assumes the past continues); (2) analysts' consensus forecast; (3) if dividends are a constant proportion of earnings, g = earnings growth rate; (4) g = retention ratio × ROE, where retention ratio = retained earnings ÷ total earnings.	IMC::Topic11::11.3.6
Distinguish between absolute (discounting) and relative valuation models.	Absolute/discounting: estimate intrinsic value as the present value of forecast future returns (e.g. dividends, free cash flows); the discount rate is the required ROE based on risk. Relative: estimate value as a measure of earnings power × a market price multiple (e.g. PE ratio, price-to-book); compare the multiple to peers/industry to assess over/under-valuation.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.1
How is basic EPS calculated and what are its limitations?	EPS = current earnings (profit after interest, tax and preference dividends) ÷ number of ordinary shares. Limitations: (1) it is an absolute monetary figure so cannot compare across firms of different sizes; (2) it is based on accounting earnings, which can be distorted by policies, one-offs and write-offs; (3) EPS is not indicative of cash flow or the ability to pay dividends.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.3
What is diluted EPS?	A hypothetical EPS figure calculated as if all potentially dilutive securities (stock options, convertible bonds, warrants) had been converted into ordinary shares. Must be disclosed alongside basic EPS to alert shareholders to the potential dilution effect.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.2
Define the historic and prospective PE ratios and explain what a high PE may signal.	Historic PE = P₀ / E₀ (current price ÷ last year's earnings). Prospective PE = P₀ / E₁ (current price ÷ forecast next-year earnings). A high PE relative to industry average may mean the market expects higher future earnings growth, OR that the stock is overvalued. Conversely a low PE may indicate low growth expectations or undervaluation.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
What are the two major problems with using the PE ratio?	(1) If a company has negative earnings, the PE is meaningless — and negative earnings may be cyclical, not permanent. (2) PE is based on accounting earnings, which are subject to different standards, policies, one-off items and cross-border inconsistencies, making comparisons unreliable.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.4
What is the PEG ratio and how is it interpreted?	PEG = PE ratio ÷ annual EPS growth rate. It adjusts the PE for growth: a low PE may look cheap, but if growth is also low, the PEG tells a different story. Rule of thumb: PEG < 1 may indicate undervaluation. Limitations: accuracy depends on the growth rate used (historic vs forecast) — distinguish "trailing PEG" from "forward PEG".	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
What is the price-to-book (PB) ratio, and when is it useful?	PB = share price ÷ book value per share (net assets per share). Useful when earnings are negative (PE fails), since book values are rarely negative. Book values are more stable than earnings. Limitations: affected by depreciation policies and accounting conventions; may not be meaningful for service firms with few tangible assets; older assets mean lower book value and a misleadingly high PB.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
What is the price-to-sales (PS) ratio and why might an analyst use it?	PS = share price ÷ sales per share. Sales are never negative and are less subject to accounting distortion than earnings. Useful for highly cyclical sectors with frequent negative earnings, and for spotting turnaround situations. Limitations: (1) sales ≠ profits for shareholders; (2) PS ignores capital structure (debt funding).	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
What is the enterprise value to sales (EV/S) ratio?	EV/S = (market cap + debt − cash) ÷ sales. Unlike PS, it captures the entire entity's value and eliminates the effect of different capital structures and accounting choices. Useful for peer comparison. A high EV/S suggests the market expects strong future sales growth.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
What is the price-to-cash-flow (PCF) ratio and what are its advantages?	PCF = share price ÷ cash flow per share. Advantages: cash flow is harder to manipulate than earnings; provides a more accurate picture for firms with high revenue but tiny margins; helps compare across firms with different accounting policies. Drawbacks: different cash flow measures exist (FCFE vs FCFF vs operating cash flow); ignores non-cash items like deferred revenue; is a simplistic measure that should complement DCF analysis.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.5
Define FCFF (free cash flow to the firm) and FCFE (free cash flow to equity).	FCFF = revenues − operating costs − gross interest − taxes + non-cash charges − investment in fixed capital − investment in working capital + net interest. Alternatively: FCFF = net income + non-cash charges − investment in fixed capital − investment in working capital + net interest. FCFE = FCFF − net interest + net borrowing. FCFF represents cash available to ALL capital providers; FCFE represents cash available to equity holders only.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.6
What is the residual income valuation method?	Residual income = net income − equity charge (where equity charge = equity capital × cost of equity). Intrinsic value per share = book value per share + PV of future residual income per share. Most appropriate when a firm does not pay dividends, has unpredictable dividends, or has negative FCF for several years but positive expected cash flow further out. Advantage: more of the value is captured in book value, making it less sensitive to terminal value estimates.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.6
Define financial gearing and the debt-equity ratio.	Gearing is the level of a company's debt relative to its equity capital, expressed as a percentage. Debt-equity ratio = total long-term debt ÷ total equity. Equity includes ordinary shares, preference shares and retained earnings. Debt includes all long-term obligations including convertibles.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.7
How does gearing affect equity returns, risk, and valuation?	At low gearing: debt is cheap (interest is tax-deductible, and debt has priority on assets) and adding debt lowers the overall cost of capital. At high gearing: equity returns become more volatile, the risk of bankruptcy rises, both debt and equity holders demand higher returns, and the overall cost of capital rises. Higher gearing → the DDM discounts future dividends at a higher required ROE → lower implied share price. Appropriate gearing depends on company size, history, sector, and the stability/predictability of cash flows.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.7
What constraints may lenders impose on highly geared companies?	Loan covenants may restrict: the level of dividends paid, the amount of additional debt taken on, and the disposal of fixed assets — all to safeguard the lender's position.	IMC::Topic11::11.4.7
