#separator:tab
#html:false
#tags column:3
What are the fundamental precepts (purposes) of accounting?	To record an organisation's transactions so its dealings can be planned and reported. Accounts are prepared to: (1) summarise transactions for management to run the business; (2) report to owners, investors and trade payables on the state of affairs; and (3) enable other interested parties to make analysis/assessments of the company.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.1
What is the main legal condition imposed on companies regarding financial records?	Under the Companies Acts, companies must keep adequate accounting records so that financial statements (income statement and balance sheet) can be produced, enabling a 'true and fair view' to be presented. Note: 'true and fair view' is not precisely defined in any Companies Act.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.1
Name the four bodies/sources that outline acceptable accounting practice and disclosure.	(1) The Companies Acts (legal requirements for all companies); (2) the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) which issues/reviews UK standards; (3) London Stock Exchange listing requirements (further disclosures for quoted companies); (4) the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) which issues IFRS, with which all UK-listed companies' consolidated accounts must comply.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.1
What documents must large companies provide to shareholders annually?	A comprehensive income statement; a balance sheet (at the period end); a director's report; an auditor's report; a cash flow statement; and a statement of changes in equity. These are filed with the Registrar of Companies (Companies House) and available to the public.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.1
What additional disclosures must London-listed companies make?	Directors' reasons for any significant departure from standard accounting practice; particulars of each company in which the group holds 20%+ of equity capital; whether the company is a close company; any authority to purchase its own shares; and information under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules. They must also produce half-yearly/interim reports.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.1
What are the Companies Act 2006 criteria for a SMALL company?	Satisfy two or more of: turnover < £15m; balance sheet total < £7.5m; average number of employees < 50.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.2
What are the Companies Act 2006 criteria for a MEDIUM-SIZED company?	Satisfy two or more of: turnover < £54m; balance sheet total < £27m; average number of employees < 250.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.2
What thresholds define a MICRO-entity (FRS 105)?	Turnover not more than £1m; balance sheet total not more than £500,000; average number of employees not more than 10. These are reporting thresholds, not audit thresholds.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.2
Why is the small/medium definition relevant to financial reporting?	Certain small and medium-sized companies are exempted from delivering their full annual statements to the Registrar of Companies, and smaller entities can use reduced-disclosure standards (e.g. FRS 102 small entities, FRS 105).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.2
What are the two legal categories of organisation?	(1) Bodies sole — sole traders and partnerships, with no legal requirement to produce accounts; (2) Bodies corporate — all other forms, recognised by law as a legal entity separate from their owners.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.3
What is meant by a company being a 'separate legal entity'?	A company (a body corporate) is a legal entity formed by registration under the Companies Acts, recognised by law as separate and distinct from its owners. This is why a set of accounts must be prepared (and group accounts may extend to subsidiaries).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.3
Distinguish a public company (plc) from a private company.	A plc has minimum issued share capital of £50,000 (at least 25% paid-up), is registered as public, and may offer shares to the general public (name ends 'plc'). A private company is any other company and cannot offer shares to the public (name ends 'limited').	IMC::Topic10::10.1.3
What is a close company?	Broadly, a company under the control of five or fewer persons (with their associates) or under the control of its directors (defined in the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.3
Who sets UK accounting standards and what are they called?	The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) is responsible for UK policy and issues Financial Reporting Standards (FRS).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
What is the IASB and what does it issue?	The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) is an independent, privately funded standard-setter that assumed responsibilities from its predecessor (the IASC) in 2001. It issues International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
What is the difference between the narrow and broad meaning of IFRS?	Narrowly, IFRS refers to the new numbered series of pronouncements the IASB issues (distinct from the older IAS series). Broadly, IFRS refers to the entire body of IASB pronouncements, including the IAS approved by the previous standards committee.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
When must IFRS be used rather than UK GAAP?	From 1 January 2021, UK-listed companies must use UK-adopted IFRS for consolidated accounts; AIM companies must also use IFRS for group accounts. Listed companies may use IFRS in individual accounts. Other UK companies and LLPs are permitted (but not required) to use IFRS for individual and consolidated accounts.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
What is UK GAAP and what is its principal standard?	UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles — the standards companies not using IFRS comply with. The main standard for most companies is FRS 102 (effective for periods on/after 1 January 2015), supported by FRS 100, FRS 101 (Reduced Disclosure Framework) and FRS 105 (micro-entities).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
What does FRS 101 do and who qualifies?	FRS 101 reduces disclosure in individual financial statements of qualifying entities that otherwise apply IFRS. Qualifying entities are members of a group preparing consolidated statements, where those statements are publicly available, intended to give a true and fair view, and the member is consolidated. (A charity cannot be a qualifying entity.)	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
Summarise the reporting options available by organisation size.	Micro: FRS 105, FRS 102 (small entities), FRS 102, or UK-adopted IFRS. Small: FRS 102 (small entities), FRS 102, or UK-adopted IFRS. Medium/large: FRS 102, FRS 101, or UK-adopted IFRS. Entities may opt UP to a higher-level standard if in their interest.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
How does FRS 102 differ in terminology from older UK standards?	FRS 102 is based on the IFRS for SMEs and is a single standard. It uses IFRS language: 'receivables/payables' rather than debtors/creditors, and 'property, plant and equipment' rather than fixed assets.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.4
What is the role of the auditor?	To report to shareholders on whether the accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Acts and relevant standards, and whether they give a true and fair view. If conditions are met they issue a clear report; if not, they must qualify their report.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
When must an auditor issue a QUALIFIED report?	Where the accounts have not been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Acts/standards, or do not give a true and fair view — for whatever reason (e.g. limitation in scope, disagreement, or fundamental uncertainty).	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
Which companies are exempt from having their accounts audited?	Only small companies are exempt from the requirement to have their accounts audited.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
What does IAS 700 (the extended audit report) require auditors to do?	Provide an overview of the scope of the audit (showing how it addressed risk and materiality); describe the risks that had the greatest effect on audit strategy and resource allocation; and explain how the concept of materiality was applied in planning and performing the audit.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
Under the UK Audit Regulations (from EU Audit Directive), what is the audit firm rotation rule for public interest entities?	Audit firms must rotate after 10 years. This can be extended by a further 10 years where public tenders are carried out, or a further 14 years where more than one audit firm is appointed.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
Name two restrictions the UK Audit Regulations place on non-audit services.	(1) A prohibition on audit firms providing certain non-audit services to clients (e.g. tax, valuation, internal audit, share underwriting); (2) where permitted non-audit services have been provided for 3+ years, a cap limiting total non-audit fees to 70% of the average audit fees paid over the previous three years.	IMC::Topic10::10.1.5
What is the purpose of the balance sheet (statement of financial position)?	It is a statement of a company's financial position at a particular point in time, showing the value and categories of assets controlled by the company and the claims against those assets (liabilities) — or alternatively, a list of resources and how they have been financed.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.1
Why must the balance sheet be read with care?	It is a summary of the financial position at one single moment in time and will quickly become out of date.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.1
How does the IASB define an asset, and how are assets categorised?	An asset is 'a resource controlled by the enterprise as a result of past events and from which future economic benefits are expected to flow'. Assets are split into non-current (long-life, infrastructure) and current (held short term, generate revenue).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
Distinguish non-current assets from current assets, with examples.	Non-current assets are held for use over more than one accounting period (tangible: plant, equipment, property, vehicles; intangible: patents, trademarks). Current assets are held short-term and converted to cash or sold (inventories, trade receivables, cash). A car retailer's business cars = non-current; cars for resale = current.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
What are the main sources of finance (claims) shown on a balance sheet?	Owners/shareholders (share of profits); retained earnings (past profits not paid out); loan stock/debenture holders (fixed interest); long-term bank loans; and current liabilities (trade payables, overdrafts).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
Into which two categories do claims on a company's assets fall?	(1) Claims due to shareholders — subscribed capital plus retained earnings, together called shareholders' funds (residual claims, paid only when the company ceases trading); (2) claims due to other lenders — which generally must be paid by particular dates.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
State the accounting identity underlying the balance sheet.	Shareholders' funds + non-current liabilities + current liabilities = non-current assets + current assets.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
How are liabilities classified by repayment period?	Debts due for repayment within one year (e.g. trade payables, bank overdrafts) are current liabilities. Debts such as loan stock, debentures or bank loans (other than overdrafts) are non-current liabilities unless due within the next year.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.2
Distinguish capital expenditure from revenue expenditure.	Capital expenditure is money spent to create future benefits (e.g. buying non-current assets or improving an asset's value/useful life beyond the current year) — it is capitalised on the balance sheet. Revenue expenditure is spent on short-life items (e.g. office supplies, maintenance, repairs) and is expensed on the income statement.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.3
Give the air-conditioning example distinguishing capitalising from expensing.	Installing an air-conditioning system (useful life > one year) should be CAPITALISED on the balance sheet and depreciated each year. Routine repairs to that system are revenue expenditure (expensed now) because they return the asset to its previous condition without improving or extending its life.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.3
Under IFRS/UK standards, what two models can be used to value non-current assets?	(1) Cost model — cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses; (2) revaluation model — fair value at the date of latest revaluation less subsequent accumulated depreciation and impairment. The chosen model must be applied to the entire class of assets.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.4
How is the net carrying (book) value of an asset calculated?	Net carrying (book) value = original cost of asset − accumulated depreciation to date. Note: net carrying value does not represent the market value of the asset.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.4
When does an impairment loss occur, and which assets must be tested annually?	An impairment loss occurs when the recoverable amount (fair value less selling costs, or value in use) is less than the carrying amount; the asset is restated to its recoverable amount. Only assets showing indication of impairment need testing — EXCEPT intangibles with indefinite useful lives and goodwill acquired in a business combination, which must be tested each year.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.4
What is depreciation and what does it represent?	Depreciation is the charge to the income statement representing the part of a non-current asset's cost used to generate revenues in that year. It spreads the asset's cost (less residual value) over the accounting periods in which it is used.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.5
State the straight-line depreciation formula.	Annual depreciation = (original cost − expected residual value) ÷ expected useful life. It spreads the depreciation charge evenly over the asset's life and is the most common UK method.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.5
State the reducing balance depreciation formula.	Depreciation rate = 1 − ⁿ√(expected residual value ÷ original cost), where n = economic life in years. This applies a constant percentage to the last period's book value, giving higher charges in early years.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.5
Worked example: a £20,000 machine, residual £2,000, 4-year life — straight-line annual charge?	(£20,000 − £2,000) ÷ 4 = £4,500 per year.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.5
Worked example: a £20,000 machine, residual £2,000, 4-year life — reducing balance rate?	1 − ⁴√(£2,000 ÷ £20,000) = 1 − 0.5623 = 0.4377 = 43.77%.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.5
How is the profit or loss on disposal of a non-current asset calculated?	Profit/loss on disposal = sale proceeds − net book value at disposal. A gain (proceeds > NBV) or loss (proceeds < NBV) is reflected in the year's results and disclosed separately if material.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.6
Worked example: asset bought for £100,000, depreciated 30% reducing balance for 4 years (NBV £24,010), sold for £30,000 — gain/loss?	Gain on disposal = £30,000 − £24,010 = £5,990.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.6
On what principle are inventories valued under UK GAAP and IFRS?	At the LOWER of cost and net realisable value (NRV), for separate items or groups of similar items. NRV = estimated sale proceeds less any costs still to be incurred (finishing, marketing, selling, distribution). If NRV < cost, inventory is written down to NRV.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.7
What are the three categories of inventory for a manufacturing company?	(1) Raw materials — purchased but not yet converted; (2) work in progress — partly converted to saleable form; (3) finished goods — fully converted to saleable form. As inventory is sold its cost transfers to the income statement as 'cost of goods sold'.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.7
What are the three common inventory valuation assumptions?	(1) FIFO (first-in-first-out) — oldest items assumed sold first; most common in UK. (2) LIFO (last-in-first-out) — newest items sold first; NOT permitted under FRS 102 or IFRS. (3) Weighted average — inventory sold drawn proportionately from units held.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.8
In a period of RISING prices, how do FIFO and LIFO affect cost of goods sold and profit?	LIFO charges the latest (highest) prices to cost of goods sold, giving a higher COGS and consequently a LOWER profit figure. FIFO charges older (lower) prices, giving a lower COGS and higher profit, with a higher closing balance sheet inventory value.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.8
Why does inventory valuation matter — what is the underlying problem?	It is a problem of allocation: allocating the total cost of inventory between the income statement (cost of goods sold) and the balance sheet (closing inventory value). The total of both always equals the total cost of inventory regardless of method.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.8
What are the two risks associated with borrowing (non-current liabilities)?	(1) Interest on debt must be paid when due (unlike dividends, which can be deferred); (2) most borrowing must be repaid by a specified date (unlike share capital, usually not redeemable unless the company is liquidated).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
What is one tax advantage of debt finance over equity?	Interest on debt is allowable for corporation tax, unlike dividends paid to shareholders which must be paid out of taxed income.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
Distinguish a fixed charge from a floating charge on a debenture.	A debenture is loan capital normally secured by a fixed or floating charge. A fixed charge is on specific identifiable assets that can be used to repay the loan on default. A floating charge is a general charge over the company's assets.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
How do unsecured loan stockholders rank in a liquidation?	Unsecured loan stockholders rank alongside other unsecured trade payables, and below debenture holders and preferential trade payables (e.g. tax).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
What is a 'deep discount bond' (for tax purposes)?	Loan capital issued at a substantial discount to par to reduce interest payments. For tax purposes, a deep discount security is one where the discount on issue is more than 15% of redemption value, OR the discount is 15% or less but exceeds half the number of years between issue and redemption.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
What is convertible loan capital and why is its interest rate lower?	Loan capital (normally unsecured) giving the owner the option to convert to shares. The market regards it as deferred equity, so its interest rate is lower than equivalent non-convertible loan capital. It ranks above ordinary shares but below unsecured non-convertible loan stock in liquidation.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
List the main types of current liability.	Loan capital with less than one year to redemption; bank loans with less than one year to repayment; payments received on account; trade payables; bills of exchange payable plus commercial paper; accruals and deferred income; and other trade payables including taxation and social security.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
Distinguish accruals from deferred income.	Accruals are amounts owing for services already partly received but not yet paid (e.g. rent owed for months elapsed). Deferred income is money received or due but not yet earned (e.g. a deposit on a contemplated purchase) — once the purchase proceeds, the deposit becomes a part payment.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
What is commercial paper?	A short-term loan security issued by a company in the form of a negotiable unsecured promissory note. In the UK, maximum maturity is one year (minimum seven days); issue size normally £500,000 or £1m (minimum £100,000); issued in bearer form at a discount (no separate interest payment).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.9
What is a provision and what are the three main types?	A provision is an amount charged against profit (treated as an expense) to record a reduction in the value of an asset, even if the exact fall is uncertain. The three types are: (1) provisions for doubtful debts; (2) provisions for depreciation; (3) provisions for unrealised profit on stock.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.10
Illustrate the provision concept using doubtful debts.	Trade receivables are a current asset, but some may not be paid. To be prudent and give a true and fair view, the firm estimates future bad debts and creates a provision for doubtful debts. This reduces trade receivables on the balance sheet and is set as an expense in the income statement. The provision is an estimate and may not match actual write-offs.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.10
What is a contingent liability and how is it treated?	A potential liability that had not come into existence by the balance sheet date. Under FRS 102 and IAS 37 it is regarded as not sufficiently predictable to warrant a specific provision/charge; instead the company reveals it by way of a note to the accounts.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.11
Give examples of contingent liabilities.	Potential liabilities on claims against the company (e.g. court action); goods sold under warranty or guarantee; guarantees given to banks; and bills of exchange discounted with bankers.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.11
What is IAS 19 and what is its basic principle for pension costs?	IAS 19 is the standard for defined benefit (DB) pension costs. Its basic principle is that the cost of providing employee benefits should be recognised in the period the employee earns the benefit, not when it is paid. The scheme's surplus/deficit goes directly onto the balance sheet of the sponsoring firm.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.12
Under IAS 19, when does a DB pension scheme show a liability versus an asset on the balance sheet?	A liability is shown when the plan is in a net deficit position (plan assets less than the present value of expected future payments); an asset is shown when the plan is in a net surplus position (plan assets greater than expected future payments).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.12
State two main measurement features of IAS 19.	(1) Pension scheme ASSETS are measured using market values; (2) pension scheme LIABILITIES are measured using a projected unit method and discounted at an AA corporate bond rate.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.12
Under IAS 19, where are actuarial gains/losses recognised, and what goes through profit or loss?	All actuarial gains/losses are immediately recognised in other comprehensive income (OCI). Only service cost and net interest are recorded in profit or loss. Net interest is calculated by applying the discount rate to the net pension asset or liability.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.12
What is a post-balance sheet event?	An event occurring between the balance sheet date and the date the accounts are approved by the board of directors. UK GAAP (FRS 102) and IAS 10 identify two types: adjusting and non-adjusting events.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.13
Distinguish adjusting from non-adjusting post-balance sheet events.	Adjusting events provide additional evidence of conditions existing at the balance sheet date (e.g. insolvency of a debtor) — the accounts ARE adjusted. Non-adjusting events arise after the balance sheet date (e.g. a major acquisition/disposal) — not adjusted, but disclosed if their non-disclosure would affect users' ability to make proper evaluations.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.13
Are dividends declared after the balance sheet date recognised as a liability?	No. A dividend declared after the balance sheet date is a non-adjusting event, and the company will NOT recognise those dividends as a liability at the balance sheet date.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.13
Distinguish authorised, issued, paid-up and called-up share capital.	Authorised: the maximum number of shares the company may legally issue (set in the Memorandum). Issued: shares actually sold to investors. Paid-up: money investors have actually paid (par value + share premium). Called-up: the portion of issued capital the company has formally requested investors to pay.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.14
List the four main types of share and their ranking for distribution in liquidation.	In ranking order: (1) preference shares; (2) ordinary shares; (3) deferred shares; (4) warrants to subscribe for shares.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.14
What is a rights issue and what is the lowest permitted issue price?	An issue of new shares offered to existing shareholders in proportion to their holding, normally at a discount to current market price (e.g. 1-for-7). The lowest price permitted (hence the maximum possible discount) is the nominal value of the share.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
What is the effect of a rights issue on share capital and the share premium account?	The share price normally falls (reflecting new discounted shares), but shareholders taking up rights suffer no dilution. Issued share capital rises by the nominal value of new shares; any amount above nominal value (premium) is added to the share premium account. It raises new capital for the company.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
What is a scrip (bonus/capitalisation) issue and what is its effect on the balance sheet?	A free issue of new shares to existing shareholders made by capitalising reserves — a book-keeping transaction with NO new capital raised. The share price falls in proportion to the additional shares. Ordinary share capital rises and reserves fall by the same amount.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
What is a stock split and what is its effect on market capitalisation?	A stock split increases the number of shares; the price is adjusted so before-and-after market capitalisation is unchanged and no dilution occurs (e.g. 1,000 shares at £5 split two-for-one = 2,000 shares at £2.50, both £5,000). A common reason is to reduce a high share price to make it more affordable.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
What is a share repurchase (buyback) and what is its effect on company value?	A company buys its own shares from existing shareholders; since 2003 these can be held 'in treasury' (out of circulation), resold later, used for employee schemes, or cancelled. The effect on underlying value should be neutral — net assets fall (cash spent/debt raised) but fewer shares in issue counterbalance this.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
Why might managers use a share buyback as a signal?	Managers have information investors lack. If they believe the market undervalues the business they may signal this; concrete actions (buybacks or increased dividends) are taken more seriously than bullish statements. Academic studies show the market responds positively to news of a buyback.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.15
Name the ways reserves can ARISE.	Accumulating profits; issuing shares at a premium (above nominal value); purchasing/repaying loan capital below its nominal value; acquiring assets below their balance sheet value; and upwardly revaluing assets (e.g. land).	IMC::Topic10::10.2.16
Name the ways reserves can be REDUCED.	Writing off goodwill; downwardly revaluing assets; losses; and issue/redemption expenses.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.16
Into which three parts are reserves normally subdivided?	(1) Share premium account; (2) revaluation reserve; (3) other reserves.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.16
What is the share premium account and how can it be used?	It records the premium when shares are issued above their nominal value (e.g. £1 shares sold at £3 → £2/share into share premium). It cannot be distributed to shareholders except on liquidation, but can be capitalised in a scrip issue or used to pay expenses of forming the company and issuing shares/debt.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.16
What is the revaluation reserve and what happens on disposal of the asset?	Any surplus (or loss) on the revaluation of an asset (e.g. land/buildings) is credited (debited) to the revaluation reserve; revaluation is typically required under accounting standards. When the asset is disposed of, the corresponding revaluation reserve is transferred to retained earnings.	IMC::Topic10::10.2.16
How is a financial instrument defined?	A contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity. Relevant standards: IFRS 9 (instruments), IAS 32 (presentation), IFRS 7 (disclosures) for IAS; sections 11 and 12 of FRS 102 for UK GAAP.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
What is a financial asset?	Any asset that is: cash; an equity instrument of another entity; a contractual right to receive cash/another financial asset or to exchange financial assets/liabilities under potentially favourable conditions; or certain contracts settled in the entity's own equity instruments.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
What is a financial liability?	Any liability that is a contractual obligation to deliver cash/another financial asset, or to exchange financial assets/liabilities under potentially unfavourable conditions; or a contract that will or may be settled in the entity's own equity instruments.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under FRS 102, how are financial instruments classified and initially measured?	Classified as 'basic' (section 11, e.g. cash, commercial paper, bonds) or 'other' (section 12, e.g. asset-backed securities, options, rights, warrants, hedging instruments). Initially measured at transaction price (including transaction costs) — UNLESS measured at fair value through profit or loss (e.g. equity in a listed company), in which case transaction costs are excluded.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Example: how does Company A account for equity bought in a LISTED Company B?	Measure the investment excluding transaction costs (recognised in profit or loss). After initial recognition, account for the investment at fair value through profit or loss.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Example: how does Company X account for equity bought in an UNLISTED Company Y?	Measure the investment at the cost of the investment INCLUDING incremental transaction costs (unlike the listed case), because it will not be possible to obtain a reliable fair value at subsequent reporting dates.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
What is the fundamental principle of IAS 32 for classifying instruments?	A financial instrument should be classified as either a financial liability or an equity instrument according to the SUBSTANCE of the contract, not its legal form — decided at initial recognition.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
When is an instrument classified as an equity instrument (IAS 32)?	Only if it: includes no contractual obligation to deliver cash/another financial asset; and will/may be settled in the issuer's own equity instruments as either a non-derivative with no obligation to deliver a variable number of shares, or a derivative settled only by exchanging a fixed amount of cash for a fixed number of own shares.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
How are preference shares with a mandatory redemption feature classified, and why?	As a LIABILITY (not equity), because the substance is a contractual obligation to deliver cash. Consequently their dividends are treated as an interest expense in the income statement. Normal preference shares (no fixed maturity, no obligation to pay) are recognised as equity.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under IFRS 7, what must a company disclose, and what is disclosed separately for hedges?	A company must describe its financial risk management objectives and policies, including hedging policies. For fair value hedges and cash flow hedges it must disclose: a description of the hedge; a description of the hedging instruments and their fair values at the balance sheet date; the nature of the risks being hedged; and (for cash flow hedges) the periods cash flows are expected to occur.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Distinguish a fair value hedge from a cash flow hedge.	A fair value hedge is essentially a hedge of the exposure to changes in fair value of a recognised asset or liability. A cash flow hedge is essentially a hedge of an exposure to variability of cash flows.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
When should a company recognise a financial asset/liability on its balance sheet?	When the company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument, rather than when the contract is settled. Derivatives are therefore recognised even though the company may have paid/received nothing on entering them.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
When does derecognition of a financial asset occur?	When either: the contractual rights to the cash flows have expired; or the asset has been transferred (e.g. sold) and the transfer qualifies for derecognition based on the extent of transfer of risks and rewards of ownership.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under IFRS 9, what are the three measurement classifications for financial assets?	(1) Fair value through profit or loss (FVPL) — the default; (2) amortised cost; (3) fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI). Amortised cost or FVOCI apply only when restrictive criteria are met.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under IFRS 9, how are 'basic' loans and receivables measured depending on business model?	Loans/receivables held to collect contractual cash flows = amortised cost. Held to collect cash flows AND sell = FVOCI. All other loans/receivables = FVPL.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under IFRS 9, how are derivatives and mandatorily redeemable preferred shares measured?	Mandatorily redeemable preferred shares and 'puttable' instruments (e.g. mutual fund units) = FVPL. Freestanding derivative financial assets (e.g. purchased options, forwards, positive-fair-value swaps) = FVPL.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
Under IFRS 9, what is the FVOCI election for equity instruments?	An entity may irrevocably elect at initial recognition to recognise only dividend income on a qualifying equity investment in profit or loss, with changes in fair value accumulated in equity through OCI (no recycling). The investment is measured at FVOCI.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
How does the IFRS 9 model compare to the old IAS 39 in terms of volatility?	IFRS 9 is simpler but likely to lead to MORE volatility in net profit. Whereas the default for non-trading assets under IAS 39 was FVOCI, under IFRS 9 it is FVPL — significant for entities holding instruments other than plain vanilla loans/receivables, or whose business model includes selling financial assets.	IMC::Topic10::10.3.1
What does the income statement provide and what period does it cover?	Information on the performance of the business over a specified period — normally one year of trading (listed companies also produce interim statements covering about six months).	IMC::Topic10::10.4.1
What are the two ways of classifying expenses on the income statement?	(1) By NATURE — grouped by the specific type of item (e.g. raw materials, depreciation, salaries); (2) by FUNCTION — grouped by the business activity they support (e.g. cost of goods sold, selling expenses, administrative costs).	IMC::Topic10::10.4.1
How is retained income (R) calculated and what do the terms mean?	R = s − c − t − d, where s = sales revenue recognised; c = matched costs (expenditure related to that revenue); t = corporation tax on the surplus of s over c; d = dividends paid and proposed to shareholders.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.1
Which standard governs revenue recognition and what is its aim?	IFRS 15 (replacing IAS 18). It provides a standardised five-step model to recognise all types of revenue from customer contracts, in a way that shows the transfer of promised goods/services in an amount reflecting the expected consideration.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.2
State the five steps of the IFRS 15 revenue recognition model.	(1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; (5) recognise revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.2
Give the retail example illustrating revenue recognition timing under IFRS 15.	Company A sells appliances on 1 January for £5,000; the customer pays 1 February; goods are delivered 1 March. Revenue is recognised in MARCH when the items are delivered to the customer — despite the sale being booked in January and paid for in February.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.2
How might IFRS 15 change revenue recognition for telecoms versus IAS 18?	Under IAS 18 a free handset bundled with a prepayment plan had revenue of zero (handset treated as a cost of the airtime contract). Under IFRS 15, the transaction price must be allocated to individual performance obligations, so telecoms companies are likely to recognise revenue EARLIER (allocating part of the revenue to the handset).	IMC::Topic10::10.4.2
What are the two formats of income statement used in the UK?	Format 1 — classifying expenses by FUNCTION (used by most retailers and about half of manufacturers; under IAS this is 'by function'). Format 2 — classifying expenses by NATURE (provides a more detailed breakdown of operating costs).	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
In a 'by function' (Format 1) income statement, what do 'cost of sales', 'distribution costs' and 'administration costs' cover?	Cost of sales = all production costs (wages, materials, manufacturing overheads including depreciation). Distribution costs = costs of getting goods to the customer. Administration costs = other costs not relating to production or distribution (e.g. office expenses, auditors' fees).	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
Define operating profit using its formula.	Operating profit = operating revenue − cost of goods sold (COGS) − operating expenses − depreciation − amortisation. It focuses on the key elements of profit generation; asset-related depreciation/amortisation are included.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
How does operating profit relate to EBIT?	Operating profit is also referred to as operating income and is similar to earnings before interest and tax (EBIT). EBIT may include non-operating revenue, which is not part of operating profit. If a firm has no non-operating revenue, operating profit equals EBIT.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
Define net income (the 'bottom line').	The total residual income remaining after accounting for all cash flows, both positive and negative. From operating profit, debt interest, taxes, and one-time charges are subtracted, and additional income from secondary operations/investments and one-time gains (e.g. asset sales) are added. It is the last line of the income statement.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
State the two approaches to calculating EBITDA from the income statement.	(1) EBITDA = net income + interest + taxes + depreciation + amortisation; (2) EBITDA = operating profit + depreciation expense + amortisation expense. EBITDA eliminates the effects of financing and capital expenditure to compare profitability across companies.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
What are non-statutory profit measures (APMs) and why are they scrutinised?	Alternative performance measures / non-IFRS (non-GAAP) measures such as EBITDA, EBIT, adjusted earnings, free cash flow, debt ratio and ROCE. The FRC and regulators scrutinise them because they can mislead investors — concerns include absent/unclear definitions or reconciliations, unclear reasons for exclusions, and items repeatedly described as 'non-recurring'.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.3
What is the statement of comprehensive income?	Under IAS 1 (revised), performance can be presented as a single statement of comprehensive income, or two statements (income statement + separate statement of comprehensive income). Comprehensive income = net income plus changes in net assets from other sources (e.g. asset revaluations, gains/losses on asset sales, foreign currency translation gains/losses) not recorded in the income statement.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.4
What is the objective of the statement of changes in equity?	To summarise the movement in the equity accounts during the year — share capital, share premium, retained earnings, revaluation surplus and unrealised gains on investments. It explains the composition of equity and how it has changed over the year.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.4
What typical information can be obtained from a statement of changes in equity?	The amount of new share capital issued; dividends paid during the year; the amount property, plant and equipment is valued up/down; net income retained during the year; and any movement in the unrealised loss/gain reserve and the foreign exchange gain/loss reserve.	IMC::Topic10::10.4.4
What is the purpose of the cash flow statement?	A summary of cash movements during the year (rather like a very summarised bank statement), concerned with cash flows rather than accruals. It is required alongside the income statement, but not for 'small companies' or for subsidiaries where 90%+ of voting rights are held within the group.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.1
Under IAS 7/FRS 102, what are the three standard headings for classifying cash flows?	(1) Operating activities; (2) investing activities; (3) financing activities.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.2
What does the 'operating activities' section show, and what reconciliation is required?	Net cash flows resulting from the operations shown in the income statement. Both UK GAAP and IFRS require a reconciliation between operating profit and net cash flow from operations, separately showing movements in inventories, trade receivables, trade payables, and other differences between cash flows and profit.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.2
Give examples of cash flows under INVESTING activities.	Outflows: purchase of PP&E (incl. software/website development); purchase of marketable securities; acquisitions net of cash acquired. Inflows: proceeds from the sale of property and equipment; proceeds from the sale of marketable securities.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.2
Give examples of cash flows under FINANCING activities.	Inflows: receiving cash from issuing stock (or spending cash to repurchase shares); receiving cash from issuing debt (or paying down debt). Outflows: paying cash dividends to shareholders. It measures the flow of cash between a firm and its owners/creditors.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.2
List the main adjustments to reconcile operating profit to net cash flow from operations.	Increase/decrease in inventories: deduct from/add to operating profit. Increase/decrease in trade receivables: deduct from/add to operating profit. Increase/decrease in trade payables: add to/deduct from operating profit. Depreciation charges: add to operating profit. Increase in provisions: add to operating profit.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.3
Worked example: operating profit £100,000; inventories +£40,000; trade payables +£20,000; trade receivables +£10,000; depreciation £10,000 — net cash flow from operations?	£100,000 − £40,000 (inventory rise) + £20,000 (payables rise) − £10,000 (receivables rise) + £10,000 (depreciation) = £80,000.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.3
Why are depreciation and provisions added back when reconciling to cash flow?	They are charged against profit but do NOT cause a cash outflow (they are non-cash items), so they must be added back to operating profit to arrive at net cash flow.	IMC::Topic10::10.5.3
Distinguish corporate investments, associated companies and subsidiaries.	Subsidiary: holding company holds the majority of voting rights (normally >50% of share capital) — they form a group. Associated company: investor has significant influence (typically 20%–50%) but not control, accounted for using the equity method. Corporate investments: various equity/debt stakes (e.g. minority holdings, bond investments) where treatment depends on the nature and level of influence.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.1
Distinguish a wholly owned from a partially owned subsidiary.	A wholly owned subsidiary is one in which all the share capital is held directly/indirectly by the holding company. A partially owned subsidiary is where less than 100% (but normally more than 50%) is owned — e.g. an 80% holding leaves a 20% minority (non-controlling) interest.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.1
Can control exist where a parent owns less than 50%?	Yes. UK GAAP and IAS 27 state that control can still occur where the parent owns less than 50% of the share capital (e.g. through significant influence or other means of control).	IMC::Topic10::10.6.1
When is significant influence presumed, and how is it evidenced?	Holding 20% or more of voting power presumes significant influence (unless clearly demonstrated otherwise); below 20% it is presumed there is NO significant influence (unless clearly demonstrated). Evidence includes board representation, participation in policy/dividend decisions, material transactions, interchange of managerial personnel, or provision of essential technical information.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.2
What is the purpose of group accounts?	Where a company is a parent at the year end, group accounts are prepared in addition to the parent's individual accounts to report the performance of a group operating effectively under a single direction. They consist of a consolidated balance sheet, income statement and cash flow statement. (Small companies are exempted under the Companies Act 2006.)	IMC::Topic10::10.6.2
How is a holding in another company treated when there is no significant influence?	It is normally treated as an investment rather than a subsidiary undertaking; the investment is marked to market and, where possible, dividends are acknowledged when received.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.2
What is a minority interest (non-controlling interest) and how is it represented?	The proportion of shareholders' funds in a partially owned subsidiary that is owned externally to the group. In the consolidated balance sheet it is presented within equity but SEPARATE from the parent's shareholders' equity. Minority interests in the group's profit or loss are also presented separately.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.3
What is goodwill and when does it arise?	Goodwill is an intangible asset arising when one company acquires another for a value in excess of book value. The premium over book value represents items such as brands, customer loyalty, good employee relations and patents.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.4
How is goodwill on acquisition calculated?	Goodwill = cost of the business combination − the acquirer's interest in the net fair value of identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired. (Example: assets £5m, liabilities £3m → net £2m; if acquired for £5m, goodwill = £3m... i.e. cost less net assets acquired.)	IMC::Topic10::10.6.4
What is negative goodwill and how is it treated?	If the total fair value of acquired net assets exceeds the purchase consideration, goodwill is negative; the excess must be recognised immediately as a profit.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.4
How is goodwill treated under IAS (IFRS 3) after acquisition?	Recognised at cost less accumulated impairment charges. Goodwill is NOT amortised but is subject to an impairment test at least annually; if recoverable value falls below carrying value, it is written down.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.5
How is goodwill treated under FRS 102 after acquisition?	Goodwill is considered to have a finite useful life and is amortised on a systematic basis over its life. If the entity cannot make a reliable estimate of the useful life, the life does NOT exceed ten years.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.5
How are intangible assets (other than goodwill) treated in group accounts?	Intangibles such as trademarks and patents acquired on acquisition must be identified separately from goodwill if they are identifiable and their cost (fair value) can be measured reliably. After initial recognition they are carried at cost less amortisation and impairment losses.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.5
What conditions must internally generated intangibles meet to be recognised?	Resulting from development expenditure, they must be recognised only if: the asset is identifiable; future economic benefits are probable; and the company has the intent and ability to complete the asset.	IMC::Topic10::10.6.5
What are the uses of accounting ratios?	They provide measures of performance and financial state, enabling comparison of: accounts of companies regardless of size; the performance of one company with another (normally same sector, as ratios vary between sectors); and one accounting period/balance sheet with another (identifying trends).	IMC::Topic10::10.7.1
Distinguish profitability, liquidity and gearing ratios.	Profitability ratios (e.g. ROCE, ROE) measure how effectively a company generates profit. Liquidity ratios (e.g. current ratio, quick ratio) measure the ability to meet short-term liabilities. Gearing ratios measure the extent to which debt is used in financing the business (solvency/financial structure).	IMC::Topic10::10.7.1
Define return on capital employed (ROCE) and give its formula.	ROCE = operating profit ÷ capital employed, where capital employed = share capital + reserves + long-term borrowing (alternatively = total assets − current liabilities). It is a key profitability measure.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.2
What are the drawbacks of ROCE as a measure of performance?	(1) 'Capital' has a wide number of interpretations; (2) operating profit is subject to accounting distortions.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.2
Define return on equity (ROE) and give its formula.	ROE = net income ÷ shareholders' equity. It measures the profit generated for the amount of reinvested earnings (shareholders' equity) and is also a measure of efficiency and management quality. (Example: £100m net income ÷ £200m equity = 50%.)	IMC::Topic10::10.7.2
Why can ROE be artificially boosted, making it potentially misleading?	If the value of shareholders' equity falls, ROE rises — so write-downs and share buybacks can artificially boost ROE. A high level of debt can also boost ROE because more debt means lower shareholders' equity (as a percentage of total assets), raising ROE.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.2
How can ROCE be broken down into two strands?	ROCE = (operating profit ÷ sales) × (sales ÷ capital employed) = profit margin × capital turnover. This is the operating profit ÷ capital employed identity decomposed.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.3
What is the profit margin strand of ROCE, and what is a normal figure?	Profit margin = operating profit ÷ sales. A normal figure for a manufacturing company is between 8% and 10%; a high-volume retailer generally has a lower margin.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.3
What does the sales ÷ capital employed strand of ROCE indicate, and what are the interpretation pitfalls?	Expressed as a multiple, it indicates the volume of sales generated by the capital employed. A rising ratio suggests improving performance, BUT a rise may instead reflect static sales with falling capital employed (lack of reinvestment/depreciation), or rapid rises may indicate overtrading (sales rising without sufficient capital), exposing the company to liquidity problems.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.3
Define asset turnover.	Asset turnover = sales ÷ total assets. It measures sales generated relative to assets, indicating efficiency of asset use. Generally the higher the ratio the better; it differs by industry, so meaningful comparisons are only within the same industry.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.3
Define operational gearing and give its two formulas.	Operational gearing measures the sensitivity of operating profit to a 1% change in sales revenue, depending on the relationship between fixed and variable costs. Formulas: (sales revenue − variable costs) ÷ operating profit; OR (operating profit + fixed costs) ÷ operating profit.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
What is the effect of high operational gearing on profits?	The company with the highest operational gearing sees the greatest benefit (largest % rise) in profit from an increase in turnover — but also the largest percentage FALL in profit when turnover falls. (Only variable costs increase as sales rise.)	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
Define the gearing ratio (financial gearing) and give the two common measures.	Gearing measures the extent to which debt finances the business. Common measures: debt ÷ capital employed (where capital employed = debt + equity); and (analysts' alternative) debt ÷ equity (where equity = shareholders' funds = share capital + reserves). Both are expressed as a percentage.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
What does it mean for a company to be solvent, and to have low gearing?	A company is solvent where the value of its assets exceeds its liabilities (excluding shareholders' funds) — i.e. it has positive shareholders' funds. A company with low gearing is one predominantly financed by equity.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
Define the current ratio and state a prudent level.	Current ratio = current assets ÷ current liabilities. A ratio between 1.5 and 2.0 is generally considered prudent, but appropriate size depends on the business. A very high ratio is not necessarily good (may indicate excess inventory or idle cash).	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
Define the quick ratio (acid test) and what it indicates.	Quick ratio = (current assets − inventory) ÷ current liabilities. It excludes inventory (less readily converted to cash), indicating what would happen if the company had to settle all trade payables at short notice. A quick ratio of less than 1.0 indicates an inability to do so.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
What is working capital and what does negative working capital indicate?	Working capital = current assets − current liabilities. Negative working capital (more current liabilities than current assets) indicates illiquidity — the company has insufficient assets that can be quickly turned into cash to meet short-term liabilities.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.4
What is the effect of a RIGHTS ISSUE on ROE, ROCE and gearing?	The share price normally falls (new shares at a discount) while shareholders' equity has increased. Other things equal, this results in a LOWER ROE and LOWER ROCE. The increase in shareholders' equity will also REDUCE the gearing ratio.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
What is the effect of a SCRIP/BONUS ISSUE on ROE, ROCE and gearing?	A scrip/bonus issue is a free issue capitalising reserves with no impact on the total value of equity. Hence ROE, ROCE and gearing all remain UNCHANGED.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
What is the effect of a STOCK SPLIT on ROE, ROCE and gearing?	A stock split increases the number of shares but the price is adjusted so before-and-after market capitalisation is unchanged. Like a scrip issue, there is NO effect on ROE, ROCE and gearing.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
What is the effect of a SHARE REPURCHASE on ROE, ROCE and gearing?	Share repurchases reduce the amount of shareholders' equity which, other things equal, BOOSTS ROE and ROCE and INCREASES gearing.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
What is accounting manipulation and why must it be considered when interpreting ratios?	Companies may manipulate accounting information (generally not illegal, but can mislead) to flatter financial ratios based on certain accounting variables. The potential for manipulation should always be considered when interpreting ratios.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
Give common methods of accounting manipulation.	Recording sales before the transaction occurs (curbed by IFRS 15); delaying recording of expenses or capitalising expenses to improve net income; avoiding allocating production costs/under-costing inventory to inflate profit; overstating asset values (better balance sheet) or understating them (write-offs reduce tax); and acquisition accounting that creates provisions to flatter future profits.	IMC::Topic10::10.7.5
